so this is a
video that i've put together entitled
the jupiter effect nice marvelous
picture of the planet jupiter the
largest planet in our solar system
and
the title comes from a book
this one the jupiter effect by john
griben
and
even with a forward by isaac asimov the
science fiction writer
john griben was a very famous
author that used to write for the new
scientist magazine and produced quite a
lot of very good books
in his time
but in 1974 he published this book
predicting that the planets
in the solar system were all going to
line up
and trigger a devastating series of
catastrophes on the earth as a result of
their gravity all pulling in one
direction at the same time
the book sold very well it became a huge
best seller now it predicted as these
things do that disaster was just eight
years away and i think that's about
right for predicting a disaster you
don't want it to be too nearby because
otherwise your
prediction turns out to be false rather
quickly and the sales of your book will
come to an end
but if it's too far into the future no
one will care
so the jupiter effect was basically that
uh the sun
and all of the planets were going to be
aligned in a grand parade and this
really didn't happen very often
and it was stated that it was the first
time in 179 years that this was going to
be the case
now this begs the question immediately
why wasn't there a series of
catastrophic disasters 179 years before
but i don't really think it um bothers
to talk about that
there's a color image illustrating the
same idea that the planets would all be
aligned
and that the gravity would create super
strong tides
and
that would lead to earthquakes the tides
um on earth not only caused the oceans
to rise and fall but there's
a corresponding stress in the rocks and
so the the land surface also does move
and that could indeed be just enough to
trigger an earthquake people have often
associated actually that the earthquakes
tend to be occurring at full moon when
the
moon's gravity is aligned pulling
upwards on the local area
um
i'm not sure about that but that's been
stated by some people
so let's just consider how the tides
actually work and the popular view is
illustrated in this picture which is
that
the bulge of water is pulled by the
gravitational effect of the moon and
then the earth spins underneath this
bulge and so different portions of the
earth experience high tide when they're
pointing towards the moon and low tide
when they're pointing at right angles to
it
and then it explains the fact that
they're two tides a day by saying
there's a corresponding bulge on the
other side of the moon
um
due to centrifugal force
now actually that's wrong because there
is no such force as centrifugal force as
such
um it's a it's a fictitious idea that
there is a centrifugal force
but it is often talked about as a
shorthand uh form for what's going on
what's really happening if you'll bear
with me
is that the water on the earth is being
pulled so that if you imagine some water
that's along the equatorial
uh
or along along the meridian line here
in the direction of the moon that is
being pulled towards the moon and only
in that horizontal direction
whereas water at this side here is being
pulled down
and across towards the moon and from
here it's being pulled up and across
towards the moon
now all of the across motion makes it
move
on this diagram from right to left
sorry from left to right as you're
looking at it
from here this way all the way across
but there's also a component
of that motion of that force pulling in
the downward direction
in other words the force vector from
this region here
it is angled downwards slightly towards
the moon in a very long thin triangle
but nevertheless it's made of two
components one that goes sideways and
one that comes down and here it's one
that goes sideways and one in the up
direction and so the water is pulled up
from the bottom half of the earth and
down from the top half of the earth on
this diagram creating this bulge as it
all tries to flow into the equatorial
line caused by those force components
and it also explains what happens on the
far side over here
consider some water at this location
this is being pulled towards the moon
again
in a direction that is not parallel to
the uh straight line but has a component
downwards towards that straight line and
a component laterally and so this water
tries to flow this way but the earth's
in the way but it can flow downwards
towards the equator and likewise the
water at this position
is attracted
in a long thin triangle towards the moon
that has a component upwards to the
center line on this diagram and so the
water here all along this region and
this region all flows towards
the center point and builds up into a
bulge
so it's actually that's the reason for
the tides
of course it's all made more complicated
by the fact that the sun and the moon
both could create tides on the earth
the sun is 400 times further away
but 400 times larger well that's not 400
times as massive but it is much more
massive than the moon
um and
the result is that
the gravity
effect of uh these objects is more or
less similar it's about 60 moon and 40
sun that causes the tides and so we get
very strong tides when the three bodies
are in a straight line when they're at
right angles the tidal effects partially
cancel out and we get the very weak neap
tides so that's really what's going on
with tides and it's important to
understand that
um if you're going to consider what
happens with the uh this supposed
jupiter effect the alignment of the
planets
so let's just have a look at some
numbers
your weight caused by the earth's
gravity with the earth being very near
um is of the order of 70 kilograms some
are more some or less
but the effect of the gravity of the
other objects pulling on you is tiny
i mean really tiny the effect pulling to
you towards the sun
the effect of the sun's gravity on your
body is the equivalent of the weight on
earth of 40 grams
now that that compared to 70 kilograms
i could do this in force units in terms
of newtons uh maybe 700 newtons and four
0.04
of a of a newton but nevertheless it's a
very tiny amount so the sun doesn't tend
to lift you very much up off the ground
as it goes over your head during the day
but there is a tiny effect
it's even tinier for the moon in fact it
lifts your weight by two grams
you can see that isn't really
going to do very much
and that's why that explanation about
the tides needs to be
put in perspective
now jupiter might be a very massive
planet uh but it's also further away
than the sun
um and only one tenth of a percent of
the sun's mass
um and so when you do the mathematics
the effect that jupiter can cause
is actually
1 100th as strong as that of the moon
because the moon is very nearby
and the inverse square law diminishes
the effect of jupiter very dramatically
and mars small planet long way away
uh compared to the moon world 0.05
micrograms it's
really the square root of nothing
and so actually 1982 came and the effect
didn't cause any major catastrophes or
earthquakes
and it was calculated that in fact
because of the
alignment
the high tide would indeed be
higher than usual by a poultry
0.04 millimeters
so
almost immeasurable compared to that you
know the size of even the tiniest waves
would defy anybody to actually really be
able to measure that
so why
didn't it work what was what was this
all going on then well
the story about the alignment first of
all
goes back to the fact that there was a
rough alignment of the planets and it
did indeed occur every
179 years
but really it was only the outer planets
that were so alliance and they were in
the order uh shown here with the
directions
spread over 95 degrees compared to the
earth
so that alignment really isn't very good
it's more than a right angle to
mercury or neptune the other planets a
little bit more concentrated and you've
got jupiter and pluto more or less in
the same direction
venus mars and saturn more or less in
but really the alignment's not brilliant
um so
what was it all about well the voyager
spacecraft were being sent out to do the
grand tour of the outer solar system
jupiter then saturn and in the case of
voyager 2 onto
uranus and neptune
and they were only able to do that
because the planets were going to be in
just the right place
in that only happened every 179 years to
allow
such a trajectory to visit all four of
them in one go
and the path taken was very much a
spiral that went to jupiter and then
picked up a slingshot of gravity from
around the back of jupiter accelerating
the spacecraft onto saturn picking up
another slingshot and spiraling it
around towards uranus and then on to
neptune
in the case of voyager 2 and that
series of gravitational slingshots
was only going to be possible in a
fairly short
time window while the planets were in
the right place
and you have to bear in mind of course
it would take some time to launch from
earth and get to jupiter and then saturn
will have moved by then and the others
will have moved so the alignment was one
in terms of timing as well as the actual
position and all of that had to be
calculated and it was realized that this
possibility existed by an engineer at
nasa who suggested the idea and there
was a bit of a rush to get the voyager
probes designed ready and launched in
time for this particular grand tour to
be possible before the alignment became
impractical again
anyway
the uh
john griffin published another book
after the non-appearance of the disaster
in 1982
the jupiter effect reconsidered
and
this
said ah actually when we said there were
going to be tidal effects and that this
alignment was going to cause effects uh
by
the gravity acting on the earth what we
really meant was the gravitational
effects were going to affect the sun
and
pull
the layers of the sun into a distorted
shape which would cause outbreaks of
sunspots and solar flares and mass
ejections from the sun and a great
increase in the overall solar wind
and the solar wind would then
have its effects on the earth vastly
increasing the number of aurora the
northern and southern lights aurora
australis and the aurora borealis
and the this would change the weather
patterns and the weather patterns could
uh create such unusually strong winds
that even the uh they would change the
rotation rate of the earth
well
this is uh
all very well but unfortunately we can
again do the mathematics and work out
that the tidal effect of the planets on
the sun
is pretty small
and
the largest slice of it is jupiter at 12
units
saturn adds a further one the earth one
venus 1.6 because it's a bit closer and
all of the rest add almost nothing to it
and so really the tidal effect is mostly
down to jupiter and the rough alignment
of the other planets will hardly change
the total
the fundamental fact is that the sun is
well over 99
of the
total mass of the solar system
in fact jupiter is just 0.1
of the mass of the sun
and it itself is then two and a half
times the mass of all the other planets
put together and so really the effect of
these is very tiny indeed and uh the
whole story was really uh just uh not
credible
but finally i particularly like to the
way that uh sir patrick moore had a go
at getting involved in this saga
and uh poking some fun in the direction
of this uh this book
what happened was that on april fool's
day the 1st of april 1976
sir patrick went on the radio and
announced that there was going to be a
planetary alignment that was going to
decrease the effect of gravity on the
earth
he was interviewed on the radio and said
that at exactly 9 47 am pluto would pass
behind jupiter and that this alignment
would create a combination gravity force
that would make people on the earth
feel less
weight he suggested that it would be
called the jovian plutonian
gravitational effect clearly uh
pointing fun at the jupiter effect
and he said that the listeners should
experience a phenomenon by trying to
jump up in the air and they he promised
that they would experience a strange
floating sensation as the gravity would
temporarily be diminished
now of course pluto is even smaller than
our moon and a right on the edge of the
main part of our solar system so far
away
that it couldn't possibly have any
influence and even if it did the
alignment changes so slowly
as these outer planets and the places
case of pluto takes 250 odd years to
rotate around the sun and jupiter 12
years so the chart
the timing at exactly
947 would well the alignment would be
almost the same at midday wouldn't it
they that it's going to change very very
slowly indeed
clearly he was having a bit of fun with
this
well at 9 47
he announced jump now
and dozens of people phoned into the
radio show reporting success
a dutch woman claimed she and her
husband had floated around the room
together
another claimed that she and 11 friends
including the table they had been sat
around began to ascend up towards the
ceiling
but not everyone was happy one angry
caller phoned in and complained he
jumped and hit his head on the ceiling
and demanded compensation
and actually this became at least in
astronomical circles one of the most
celebrated april fool's day hoaxes of
the late 20th century
now to give him his due
john gribben finally in 1999 said about
the jupiter effect
quote i'm sorry i had anything to do
with it and uh i think that's uh very
magnanimous of him
i suspect he made quite a lot of money
selling quite a lot of books
but as long as people treated it all in
fun i don't really have a problem with
that anyway
that's the jupiter effect story